lame(1)                      LAME audio compressor                     lame(1)



NAME
       lame - create mp3 audio files

SYNOPSIS
       lame [options] <infile> <outfile>

DESCRIPTION
       LAME  is  a program which can be used to create compressed audio files.
       (Lame ain't an MP3 encoder).  These audio files can be played  back  by
       popular MP3 players such as mpg123 or madplay.  To read from stdin, use
       "-" for <infile>.  To write to stdout, use "-" for <outfile>.

OPTIONS
       Input options:

       -r     Assume  the  input  file  is  raw  pcm.    Sampling   rate   and
              mono/stereo/jstereo  must be specified on the command line.  For
              each stereo sample, LAME expects the input data  to  be  ordered
              left channel first, then right channel. By default, LAME expects
              them to be signed integers with a bitwidth of 16.   Without  -r,
              LAME  will  perform  several fseek()'s on the input file looking
              for WAV and AIFF headers.
              Might not be available on your release.

       -x     Swap bytes in the input file or output file when using --decode.
              For sorting out little endian/big endian type problems.  If your
              encodings sounds like static, try this first.
              Without using -x, LAME will treat input file as native endian.

       -s sfreq
              sfreq = 8/11.025/12/16/22.05/24/32/44.1/48

              Required  only  for  raw  PCM input files.  Otherwise it will be
              determined from the header of the input file.

              LAME will automatically resample the input file to  one  of  the
              supported MP3 samplerates if necessary.

       --bitwidth n
              Input bit width per sample.
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32 (default 16)

              Required  only  for  raw  PCM input files.  Otherwise it will be
              determined from the header of the input file.

       --signed
              Instructs LAME that the samples from the input are  signed  (the
              default for 16, 24 and 32 bits raw pcm data).

              Required only for raw PCM input files.

       --unsigned
              Instructs LAME that the samples from the input are unsigned (the
              default for 8 bits raw pcm data, where 0x80 is zero).

              Required only for raw PCM input  files  and  only  available  at
              bitwidth 8.

       --little-endian
              Instructs  LAME  that  the samples from the input are in little-
              endian form.

              Required only for raw PCM input files.

       --big-endian
              Instructs LAME that the samples from the input are in big-endian
              form.

              Required only for raw PCM input files.

       --mp2input
              Assume the input file is a MPEG Layer II (ie MP2) file.
              If  the  filename  ends  in ".mp2" LAME will assume it is a MPEG
              Layer II file.  For stdin or Layer II files which do not end  in
              .mp2 you need to use this switch.

       --mp3input
              Assume the input file is a MP3 file.
              Useful for downsampling from one mp3 to another.  As an example,
              it can be useful for streaming through an IceCast server.
              If the filename ends in ".mp3" LAME will assume it  is  an  MP3.
              For  stdin or MP3 files which do not end in .mp3 you need to use
              this switch.

       --nogap file1 file2 ...
              gapless encoding for a set of contiguous files

       --nogapout dir
              output dir for gapless encoding (must precede --nogap)


       Operational options:

       -m mode
              mode = s, j, f, d, m, l, r

              Joint-stereo is the default mode for stereo files with VBR  when
              -V  is  more  than  4  or  fixed bitrates of 160kbs or less.  At
              higher fixed bitrates or higher VBR  settings,  the  default  is
              stereo.

              (s)imple stereo
              In  this  mode, the encoder makes no use of potentially existing
              correlations between the two input channels.  It  can,  however,
              negotiate  the  bit  demand  between both channel, i.e. give one
              channel more bits if the other contains silence  or  needs  less
              bits because of a lower complexity.

              (j)oint stereo
              In this mode, the encoder will make use of a correlation between
              both channels.  The signal will be matrixed into a sum  ("mid"),
              computed  by  L+R,  and  difference ("side") signal, computed by
              L-R, and more bits are allocated to the mid channel.  This  will
              effectively  increase  the bandwidth if the signal does not have
              too much stereo separation, thus giving a  significant  gain  in
              encoding quality.

              Using mid/side stereo inappropriately can result in audible com‐
              pression artifacts.  To much switching between mid/side and reg‐
              ular  stereo can also sound bad.  To determine when to switch to
              mid/side stereo, LAME uses a much more  sophisticated  algorithm
              than  that  described in the ISO documentation, and thus is safe
              to use in joint stereo mode.

              (f)orced MS stereo
              This mode will force MS stereo on all frames.   It  is  slightly
              faster  than joint stereo, but it should be used only if you are
              sure that every frame of the input file has very  little  stereo
              separation.

              (d)ual mono
              In  this  mode,  the  2  channels  will be totally independently
              encoded.  Each channel will have exactly half  of  the  bitrate.
              This  mode  is  designed  for  applications  like dual languages
              encoding (for example: English in one channel and French in  the
              other).   Using this encoding mode for regular stereo files will
              result in a lower quality encoding.

              (m)ono
              The input will be encoded as a mono signal.  If it was a  stereo
              signal,  it  will be downsampled to mono.  The downmix is calcu‐
              lated as the sum of the left and right channel, attenuated by  6
              dB.

              (l)eft channel only
              The  input will be encoded as a mono signal.  If it was a stereo
              signal, the left channel will be encoded only.

              (r)ight channel only
              The input will be encoded as a mono signal.  If it was a  stereo
              signal, the right channel will be encoded only.


       -a     Mix the stereo input file to mono and encode as mono.
              The downmix is calculated as the sum of the left and right chan‐
              nel, attenuated by 6 dB.

              This option is only needed in the case of raw PCM  stereo  input
              (because  LAME  cannot  determine  the number of channels in the
              input file).  To encode a stereo PCM input  file  as  mono,  use
              lame -m s -a.

              For  WAV  and  AIFF  input files, using -m will always produce a
              mono .mp3 file from both mono and stereo input.

       -d     Allows the left and right channels to use different  block  size
              types.

       --freeformat
              Produces a free format bitstream.  With this option, you can use
              -b with any bitrate higher than 8 kbps.

              However, even if an mp3 decoder  is  required  to  support  free
              bitrates  at  least  up  to 320 kbps, many players are unable to
              deal with it.

              Tests have shown that the following decoders support  free  for‐
              mat:
              FreeAmp up to 440 kbps
              in_mpg123 up to 560 kbps
              l3dec up to 310 kbps
              LAME up to 560 kbps
              MAD up to 640 kbps

       --decode
              Uses LAME for decoding to a wav file.  The input file can be any
              input type supported by  encoding,  including  layer  II  files.
              LAME uses a bugfixed version of mpglib for decoding.

              If  -t is used (disable wav header), LAME will output raw pcm in
              native endian format.  You can use -x to swap bytes order.

              This option is not usable if the MP3 decoder was explicitly dis‐
              abled in the build of LAME.

       -t     Disable writing of the INFO Tag on encoding.
              This  tag  in  embedded in frame 0 of the MP3 file.  It includes
              some information about the encoding options of the file, and  in
              VBR it lets VBR aware players correctly seek and compute playing
              times of VBR files.

              When --decode is specified (decode to WAV), this flag will  dis‐
              able  writing  of  the  WAV header.  The output will be raw pcm,
              native endian format.  Use -x to swap bytes.

       --comp arg
              Instead of choosing bitrate, using this option, user can  choose
              compression ratio to achieve.

       --scale n
       --scale-l n
       --scale-r n
              Scales  input  (every  channel,  only left channel or only right
              channel) by n.  This just multiplies the PCM data (after it  has
              been converted to floating point) by n.

              n > 1: increase volume
              n = 1: no effect
              n < 1: reduce volume

              Use  with care, since most MP3 decoders will truncate data which
              decodes to values greater than 32768.

       --replaygain-fast
              Compute ReplayGain fast but slightly inaccurately.

              This computes "Radio" ReplayGain on the input data stream  after
              user‐specified volume‐scaling and/or resampling.

              The  ReplayGain  analysis  does not affect the content of a com‐
              pressed data stream itself, it is a value stored in  the  header
              of  a  sound file.  Information on the purpose of ReplayGain and
              the  algorithms  used  is  available   from   http://www.replay‐
              gain.org/.

              Only  the "RadioGain" Replaygain value is computed, it is stored
              in the LAME tag.  The analysis is performed with  the  reference
              volume  equal  to  89dB.   Note:  the  reference volume has been
              changed from 83dB on transition from version 3.95 to 3.95.1.

              This switch is enabled by default.

              See also: --replaygain-accurate, --noreplaygain

       --replaygain-accurate
              Compute ReplayGain more accurately and find the peak sample.

              This enables decoding on the fly, computes "Radio" ReplayGain on
              the  decoded  data  stream, finds the peak sample of the decoded
              data stream and stores it in the file.

              The ReplayGain analysis does not affect the content  of  a  com‐
              pressed  data  stream itself, it is a value stored in the header
              of a sound file.  Information on the purpose of  ReplayGain  and
              the   algorithms   used  is  available  from  http://www.replay‐
              gain.org/.


              By default, LAME performs ReplayGain analysis on the input  data
              (after  the user‐specified volume scaling).  This behavior might
              give slightly inaccurate results because the data on the  output
              of  a  lossy compression/decompression sequence differs from the
              initial input data.  When --replaygain-accurate is specified the
              mp3 stream gets decoded on the fly and the analysis is performed
              on the decoded data stream.  Although theoretically this  method
              gives more accurate results, it has several disadvantages:

               *   tests have shown that the difference between the ReplayGain
                   values computed on the input data and decoded data is  usu‐
                   ally  not  greater  than 0.5dB, although the minimum volume
                   difference the human ear can perceive is about 1.0dB

               *   decoding on the fly significantly slows down  the  encoding
                   process

              The apparent advantage is that:

               *   with  --replaygain-accurate  the real peak sample is deter‐
                   mined and stored in the file.  The knowledge  of  the  peak
                   sample  can  be  useful  to decoders (players) to prevent a
                   negative effect called 'clipping' that  introduces  distor‐
                   tion into the sound.

              Only  the "RadioGain" ReplayGain value is computed, it is stored
              in the LAME tag.  The analysis is performed with  the  reference
              volume  equal  to  89dB.   Note:  the  reference volume has been
              changed from 83dB on transition from version 3.95 to 3.95.1.

              This option is not usable if the MP3 decoder was explicitly dis‐
              abled  in the build of LAME.  (Note: if LAME is compiled without
              the MP3 decoder, ReplayGain analysis is performed on  the  input
              data after user-specified volume scaling).

              See also: --replaygain-fast, --noreplaygain --clipdetect

       --noreplaygain
              Disable ReplayGain analysis.

              By  default ReplayGain analysis is enabled. This switch disables
              it.

              See also: --replaygain-fast, --replaygain-accurate

       --clipdetect
              Clipping detection.

              Enable --replaygain-accurate and print a message  whether  clip‐
              ping occurs and how far in dB the waveform is from full scale.

              This option is not usable if the MP3 decoder was explicitly dis‐
              abled in the build of LAME.

              See also: --replaygain-accurate

       --preset  type | [cbr] kbps
              Use one of the built-in presets.

              Have a look at the PRESETS section below.

              --preset help gives more infos about the  the  used  options  in
              these presets.

       --preset  type | [cbr] kbps
              Use one of the built-in  presets.

       --noasm  type
              Disable  specific  assembly optimizations ( mmx / 3dnow / sse ).
              Quality will not increase, only speed will be reduced.   If  you
              have  problems  running Lame on a Cyrix/Via processor, disabling
              mmx optimizations might solve your problem.


       Verbosity:

       --disptime n
              Set the delay in seconds between two display updates.

       --nohist
              By default, LAME will display a bitrate histogram while  produc‐
              ing VBR mp3 files.  This will disable that feature.
              Histogram display might not be available on your release.

       -S
       --silent
       --quiet
              Do not print anything on the screen.

       --verbose
              Print a lot of information on the screen.

       --help Display a list of available options.


       Noise shaping & psycho acoustic algorithms:

       -q qual
              0 <= qual <= 9

              Bitrate  is of course the main influence on quality.  The higher
              the bitrate, the higher the quality.  But for a  given  bitrate,
              we  have  a choice of algorithms to determine the best scalefac‐
              tors and Huffman encoding (noise shaping).

              -q 0:
              use slowest & best possible version of all algorithms.  -q 0 and
              -q 1 are slow and may not produce significantly higher quality.

              -q 2:
              recommended.  Same as -h.

              -q 5:
              default value.  Good speed, reasonable quality.

              -q 7:
              same  as  -f.  Very fast, ok quality.  Psycho acoustics are used
              for pre-echo & M/S, but no noise shaping is done.

              -q 9:
              disables almost all algorithms including psy-model.  Poor  qual‐
              ity.

       -h     Use some quality improvements.  Encoding will be slower, but the
              result will be of higher quality.  The behavior is the  same  as
              the -q 2 switch.
              This switch is always enabled when using VBR.

       -f     This  switch  forces  the encoder to use a faster encoding mode,
              but with a lower quality.  The behavior is the same as the -q  7
              switch.

              Noise  shaping will be disabled, but psycho acoustics will still
              be computed for bit allocation and pre-echo detection.


       CBR (constant bitrate, the default) options:

       -b n   For MPEG-1 (sampling frequencies of 32, 44.1 and 48 kHz)
              n = 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 160,  192,  224,  256,
              320

              For MPEG-2 (sampling frequencies of 16, 22.05 and 24 kHz)
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144, 160

              For MPEG-2.5 (sampling frequencies of 8, 11.025 and 12 kHz)
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64

              Default is 128 for MPEG1 and 64 for MPEG2.

       --cbr  enforce use of constant bitrate


       ABR (average bitrate) options:

       --abr n
              Turns  on  encoding  with a targeted average bitrate of n kbits,
              allowing to use frames of different sizes.  The allowed range of
              n is 8 - 310, you can use any integer value within that range.

              It  can be combined with the -b and -B switches like: lame --abr
              123 -b 64 -B 192 a.wav a.mp3 which would limit the allowed frame
              sizes between 64 and 192 kbits.

              The  use  of  -B  is NOT RECOMMENDED.  A 128 kbps CBR bitstream,
              because of the bit reservoir, can actually have frames which use
              as many bits as a 320 kbps frame.  VBR modes minimize the use of
              the bit reservoir, and thus need to allow 320 kbps frames to get
              the same flexibility as CBR streams.


       VBR (variable bitrate) options:

       -v     use variable bitrate (--vbr-new)

       --vbr-old
              Invokes the oldest, most tested VBR algorithm.  It produces very
              good quality files, though is  not  very  fast.   This  has,  up
              through v3.89, been considered the "workhorse" VBR algorithm.

       --vbr-new
              Invokes  the  newest  VBR  algorithm.  During the development of
              version 3.90, considerable tuning was done  on  this  algorithm,
              and  it  is now considered to be on par with the original --vbr-
              old.  It has the added advantage of being very fast (over  twice
              as fast as --vbr-old).

       -V n   0 <= n <= 9
              Enable  VBR  (Variable  BitRate)  and specifies the value of VBR
              quality (default = 4).  0 = highest quality.


       ABR and VBR options:

       -b bitrate
              For MPEG-1 (sampling frequencies of 32, 44.1 and 48 kHz)
              n = 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 160,  192,  224,  256,
              320

              For MPEG-2 (sampling frequencies of 16, 22.05 and 24 kHz)
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144, 160

              For MPEG-2.5 (sampling frequencies of 8, 11.025 and 12 kHz)
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64

              Specifies  the minimum bitrate to be used.  However, in order to
              avoid wasted space, the smallest frame size  available  will  be
              used during silences.

       -B bitrate
              For MPEG-1 (sampling frequencies of 32, 44.1 and 48 kHz)
              n  =  32,  40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 160, 192, 224, 256,
              320

              For MPEG-2 (sampling frequencies of 16, 22.05 and 24 kHz)
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144, 160

              For MPEG-2.5 (sampling frequencies of 8, 11.025 and 12 kHz)
              n = 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64

              Specifies the maximum allowed bitrate.

              Note: If you own an mp3 hardware player build upon  a  MAS  3503
              chip, you must set maximum bitrate to no more than 224 kpbs.

       -F     Strictly enforce the -b option.
              This is mainly for use with hardware players that do not support
              low bitrate mp3.

              Without this option, the minimum bitrate  will  be  ignored  for
              passages  of  analog silence, i.e. when the music level is below
              the absolute threshold of human hearing (ATH).


       Experimental options:

       -X n   0 <= n <= 7

              When LAME searches for a "good" quantization, it has to  compare
              the  actual  one with the best one found so far.  The comparison
              says which one is better, the best so far or the actual.  The -X
              parameter  selects  between  different  approaches  to make this
              decision, -X0 being the default mode:

              -X0
              The criteria are (in order of importance):
              * less distorted scalefactor bands
              * the sum of noise over the thresholds is lower
              * the total noise is lower

              -X1
              The actual is better if the maximum noise over  all  scalefactor
              bands is less than the best so far.

              -X2
              The actual is better if the total sum of noise is lower than the
              best so far.

              -X3
              The actual is better if the total sum of noise is lower than the
              best  so far and the maximum noise over all scalefactor bands is
              less than the best so far plus 2dB.

              -X4
              Not yet documented.

              -X5
              The criteria are (in order of importance):
              * the sum of noise over the thresholds is lower
              * the total sum of noise is lower

              -X6
              The criteria are (in order of importance):
              * the sum of noise over the thresholds is lower
              * the maximum noise over all scalefactor bands is lower
              * the total sum of noise is lower

              -X7
              The criteria are:
              * less distorted scalefactor bands
              or
              * the sum of noise over the thresholds is lower

       -Y     lets LAME ignore noise in sfb21, like in CBR


       MP3 header/stream options:

       -e emp emp = n, 5, c

              n = (none, default)
              5 = 0/15 microseconds
              c = citt j.17

              All this does is set a flag in the bitstream.  If you have a PCM
              input  file  where one of the above types of (obsolete) emphasis
              has been applied, you can set this flag in LAME.  Then  the  mp3
              decoder should de-emphasize the output during playback, although
              most decoders ignore this flag.

              A better solution would be  to  apply  the  de-emphasis  with  a
              standalone utility before encoding, and then encode without -e.

       -c     Mark the encoded file as being copyrighted.

       -o     Mark the encoded file as being a copy.

       -p     Turn on CRC error protection.
              It  will add a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code in each frame,
              allowing to detect transmission errors that could occur  on  the
              MP3 stream.  However, it takes 16 bits per frame that would oth‐
              erwise be used for encoding, and then will slightly  reduce  the
              sound quality.

       --nores
              Disable the bit reservoir.  Each frame will then become indepen‐
              dent from previous ones, but the quality will be lower.

       --strictly-enforce-ISO
              With this option, LAME will enforce the 7680 bit  limitation  on
              total frame size.
              This  results in many wasted bits for high bitrate encodings but
              will ensure strict ISO compatibility.  This compatibility  might
              be important for hardware players.


       Filter options:

       --lowpass freq
              Set a lowpass filtering frequency in kHz.  Frequencies above the
              specified one will be cutoff.

       --lowpass-width freq
              Set the width of the lowpass filter.  The default value  is  15%
              of the lowpass frequency.

       --highpass freq
              Set  an  highpass filtering frequency in kHz.  Frequencies below
              the specified one will be cutoff.

       --highpass-width freq
              Set the width of the highpass filter in kHz.  The default  value
              is 15% of the highpass frequency.

       --resample sfreq
              sfreq = 8, 11.025, 12, 16, 22.05, 24, 32, 44.1, 48
              Select output sampling frequency (only supported for encoding).
              If  not  specified,  LAME  will automatically resample the input
              when using high compression ratios.


       ID3 tag options:

       --tt title
              audio/song title (max 30 chars for version 1 tag)

       --ta artist
              audio/song artist (max 30 chars for version 1 tag)

       --tl album
              audio/song album (max 30 chars for version 1 tag)

       --ty year
              audio/song year of issue (1 to 9999)

       --tc comment
              user-defined text (max 30 chars for v1 tag, 28 for v1.1)

       --tn track[/total]
              audio/song track number and (optionally)  the  total  number  of
              tracks  on  the  original  recording. (track and total each 1 to
              255. Providing just the track number creates v1.1 tag, providing
              a total forces v2.0).

       --tg genre
              audio/song genre (name or number in list)

       --add-id3v2
              force addition of version 2 tag

       --id3v1-only
              add only a version 1 tag

       --id3v2-only
              add only a version 2 tag

       --id3v2-latin1
              add following options in ISO-8859-1 text encoding.

       --id3v2-utf16
              add following options in unicode text encoding.

       --space-id3v1
              pad version 1 tag with spaces instead of nulls

       --pad-id3v2
              same as --pad-id3v2-size 128

       --pad-id3v2-size num
              adds version 2 tag, pad with extra "num" bytes

       --genre-list
              print alphabetically sorted ID3 genre list and exit

       --ignore-tag-errors
              ignore errors in values passed for tags, use defaults in case an
              error occurs


       Analysis options:

       -g     run graphical analysis on <infile>.  <infile> can also be a .mp3
              file.   (This feature is a compile time option.  Your binary may
              for speed reasons be compiled without this.)


ID3 TAGS
       LAME is able to embed ID3 v1, v1.1 or v2 tags inside  the  encoded  MP3
       file.   This  allows  to  have  some useful information about the music
       track included inside the file.  Those data can be  read  by  most  MP3
       players.

       Lame  will  smartly  choose which tags to use.  It will add ID3 v2 tags
       only if the input comments won't fit in v1 or v1.1 tags, i.e.  if  they
       are more than 30 characters.  In this case, both v1 and v2 tags will be
       added, to ensure reading of tags by MP3 players  which  are  unable  to
       read ID3 v2 tags.


ENCODING MODES
       LAME  is  able  to encode your music using one of its 3 encoding modes:
       constant bitrate (CBR), average  bitrate  (ABR)  and  variable  bitrate
       (VBR).

       Constant Bitrate (CBR)
              This  is the default encoding mode, and also the most basic.  In
              this mode, the bitrate will be the same for the whole file.   It
              means  that  each  part  of your mp3 file will be using the same
              number of bits.  The musical passage being a  difficult  one  to
              encode or an easy one, the encoder will use the same bitrate, so
              the quality of your mp3 is variable.  Complex parts will be of a
              lower quality than the easiest ones.  The main advantage is that
              the final files size won't change and  can  be  accurately  pre‐
              dicted.

       Average Bitrate (ABR)
              In  this  mode,  you choose the encoder will maintain an average
              bitrate while using higher bitrates for the parts of your  music
              that  need more bits.  The result will be of higher quality than
              CBR encoding but the average file size will remain  predictable,
              so this mode is highly recommended over CBR.  This encoding mode
              is similar to what is referred as vbr in AAC or Liquid Audio  (2
              other compression technologies).

       Variable bitrate (VBR)
              In  this  mode, you choose the desired quality on a scale from 9
              (lowest quality/biggest distortion) to 0 (highest quality/lowest
              distortion).   Then  encoder tries to maintain the given quality
              in the whole file by choosing the  optimal  number  of  bits  to
              spend  for  each part of your music.  The main advantage is that
              you are able to specify the  quality  level  that  you  want  to
              reach,  but  the  inconvenient  is  that  the final file size is
              totally unpredictable.


PRESETS
       The --preset switches are aliases over LAME settings.

       To activate these presets:

       For VBR modes (generally highest quality):

       --preset medium
              This preset should provide near transparency to most  people  on
              most music.

       --preset standard
              This  preset  should  generally be transparent to most people on
              most music and is already quite high in quality.

       --preset extreme
              If you have extremely good hearing and similar  equipment,  this
              preset  will  generally provide slightly higher quality than the
              standard mode.

       For CBR 320kbps (highest quality possible from the --preset switches):

       --preset insane
              This preset will usually be overkill for most  people  and  most
              situations,  but  if  you must have the absolute highest quality
              with no regard to filesize, this is the way to go.

       For ABR modes (high quality per given bitrate but not as high as VBR):

       --preset  kbps
              Using this preset will usually give you good quality at a speci‐
              fied  bitrate.   Depending  on  the bitrate entered, this preset
              will determine the optimal settings for that  particular  situa‐
              tion.   While  this approach works, it is not nearly as flexible
              as VBR, and usually will not attain the same level of quality as
              VBR at higher bitrates.

       The  following  options  are  also available for the corresponding pro‐
       files:

       standard|extreme
       cbr  kbps

       cbr    If you use the ABR mode (read above) with a significant  bitrate
              such  as  80, 96, 112, 128, 160, 192, 224, 256, 320, you can use
              the cbr option to force CBR mode encoding instead of  the  stan‐
              dard  ABR  mode.  ABR does provide higher quality but CBR may be
              useful in situations such as when  streaming  an  MP3  over  the
              Internet may be important.



EXAMPLES
       Fixed bit rate jstereo 128kbs encoding:

              lame sample.wav sample.mp3


       Fixed  bit  rate  jstereo  128  kbps  encoding, highest quality (recom‐
       mended):

              lame -h sample.wav sample.mp3


       Fixed bit rate jstereo 112 kbps encoding:

              lame -b 112 sample.wav sample.mp3


       To disable joint stereo encoding (slightly faster, but less quality  at
       bitrates <= 128 kbps):

              lame -m s sample.wav sample.mp3


       Fast encode, low quality (no psycho-acoustics):

              lame -f sample.wav sample.mp3


       Variable bitrate (use -V n to adjust quality/filesize):

              lame -h -V 6 sample.wav sample.mp3


       Streaming mono 22.05 kHz raw pcm, 24 kbps output:

              cat inputfile | lame -r -m m -b 24 -s 22.05 - - > output


       Streaming mono 44.1 kHz raw pcm, with downsampling to 22.05 kHz:

              cat inputfile | lame -r -m m -b 24 --resample 22.05 - - > output


       Encode with the standard preset:

              lame --preset standard sample.wav sample.mp3


BUGS
       Probably there are some.

SEE ALSO
       mpg123(1), madplay(1), sox(1)

AUTHORS
       LAME originally developed by Mike Cheng and now maintained by
       Mark Taylor, and the LAME team.

       GPSYCHO psycho-acoustic model by Mark Taylor.
       (See http://www.mp3dev.org/).

       mpglib by Michael Hipp

       Manual page by William Schelter, Nils Faerber, Alexander Leidinger,
       and Rogério Brito.



LAME 3.99                        July 08, 2008                         lame(1)
